Create dev doc “web-components-in-react” (#261)
Zywave/booster: src/_areas/design-system/developers/web-components-in-react.md

---
layout: documentation
title: Web Components in React
subtitle: Using custom webcomponents (e.g. ZUI) in React
hideToc: false
---
## Overview

This article will cover how our team uses custom web components (particularly with ZUI) in React, along with the issues and resolutions we've encountered along the way.

Web components do not work perfectly out of the box with React. Developers will quickly run into issues with events, object and array properties, attribute differences, and types (if using Typescript). All of these issues, along with how we solved them, are detailed below.

> If you want to skip all of the details and go straight to ZUI in React, see `Introducing @zywave/zui-react-wrapper` below.

Author: This didn't work immediately, but I added the the rest of the uri and it seems to work

      )}
      <zui-button onClick={() => setDialogOpened(true)}>
        Open dialog!
      </zui-button>
      <zui-button danger onClick={() => setShowDialog(false)}>
        Destroy dialog (watch your console)!
      </zui-button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

<docs-spacer size="small"></docs-spacer>

#### Unmounting

When a component is being unmounted, you typically want to remove the event listener on the web component. However, the web component is usually gone by this point, so accessing the ref will fail. You can work around this with a null check.

```jsx
function EventHandlers() {
  ...
  React.useLayoutEffect(() => {
    const { current } = dialogRef;

    if(current) {
      current.addEventListener("close", closeDialog);
    }

    return () => current && current.removeEventListener("close", closeDialog);
  }, [dialogRef, closeDialog]);
  ...
}
```

Certain tools, such as Storybook, will try to remove event listeners when a component is unmounted (e.g. when switching between stories). However, Storybook does not do this null check which causes it to fail, giving you an error screen immediately after switching between stories.

<docs-spacer size="small"></docs-spacer>

> ### Object and Array props

Author: Added (it's using JSON.stringify)

Here's a simple example, with a contrived obj prop:

```jsx
function ObjectProps() {
  const obj = { foo: "bar", foo2: "bar2" };

  return (
    <div className="margin-top-4rem">
      <h2>Object Props</h2>
      <zui-button obj={obj}>View my props in dev tools</zui-button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

In the browser, this shows up as:

```html
<zui-button obj="[object Object]" type="primary" tabindex="0" role="button">View my props in dev tools</zui-button>
```

<docs-spacer size="small"></docs-spacer>

### Typescript

Typescript brings a new problem, because web components are not standard HTML elements, so they are not recognized by Typescript. This means that you wil have to add the web component type to JSX.IntrinsicElements for Typescript to recognize it and allow the build to succeed.

Furthermore, you need to add all of the props and their respective types to the web component type.

Here is an example of how you would add `zui-dialog` and `zui-button` to JSX.IntrinsicElements:

```tsx
declare global {
  namespace JSX {
    interface IntrinsicElements {

>       "zui-dialog": {

Author: That would have been helpful a while ago 🤣 

I'll definitely take a look at that

>       "zui-dialog": {

Author: I think we can make this work, but it's not a small effort. I've created an issue here - https://gitlab.com/zywave/ams/ams-policy-and-revenue/zui-react-wrapper/-/issues/2

        className?: "small" | "medium" | "large";
        noCancelOutsideDialog?: true | null;
        children?: React.ReactNode;
        opened?: true | null;
        onClose?: (event: CustomEvent<boolean>) => void;
        ref?: React.RefObject<HTMLElement>;
      };
      "zui-button": {
        disabled?: true | null;
        onClick?: (event: MouseEvent) => void;
        onKeyDown?: (event: KeyboardEvent) => void;
        onKeyUp?: (event: KeyboardEvent) => void;
        children?: React.ReactNode;
        className?: string;
        icon?: boolean;
        type?: "primary" | "secondary" | "link";
        slot?: string;
        danger?: true | null;
        obj?: any;
        ref?: React.RefObject<HTMLElement>;
      };
    }
  }
}
```

<docs-spacer size="small"></docs-spacer>

### React attribute differences (class vs className, style)

> This is a minor annoyance, but React components will use `className`, but web components will use `class`. This will be confusing if you use web components directly, but it can be easily solved by mapping between the two in a wrapper component. `style` will also need to be a string instead of the structured CSS properties that React uses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While only a minor annoyance, there are some discrepancies in a handful of attributes in React vs native Web Components.

One common gotcha is `className`. Since React on its own cannot foresee every possible custom HTML element, `className` is not directly mapped for web components. As a result, you will need to watch out for this and may get some benefit in mapping the two together with wrapper components.

As an example:

TODO INSERT JSX EXAMPLE

Another likely gotcha comes in the form of `style`. You'll need to just use a plain old string here, instead of the structured CSS properties that React uses.
```

Author: I had to check on this, the object style attribute actually works as expected.

Other differences with React attributes can be found here: [https://reactjs.org/docs/dom-elements.html#differences-in-attributes](https://reactjs.org/docs/dom-elements.html#differences-in-attributes)

---

## Fixing these problems

> All of the above problems are fixable, and there are two packages available on NPM that our team has attempted to use to solve these problems. However, both of these packages only solve some of these problems.

Reviewer: I'd maybe just exclude the packages that you tried (or maybe add them to a section at the bottom as alternatives to consider).

<docs-spacer size="small"></docs-spacer>

### webcomponents-in-react

[webcomponents-in-react](https://www.npmjs.com/package/webcomponents-in-react) was the first package we attempted to use to wrap the ZUI web components. This worked fairly well, but it did not fully solve the problem of event handlers. This made Storybook unstable, causing it to crash when switching between stories.

<docs-spacer size="small"></docs-spacer>

### use-custom-element

[use-custom-element](https://www.npmjs.com/package/use-custom-element) was the second page we attempted to use. This fixed our unmounting issue, but the event handlers were not set up with the correct names (being `change` instead of `onChange`, etc.). It also broke any non-event functions (such as the `queryHandler` used in `zui-select-dropdown`).

---

## Using @zywave/useCustomElement-in-react

> Our team created [@zywave/useCustomElement-in-react](https://packages.zywave.com/feeds/private-npm/@zywave/usecustomelement-in-react/versions) to solve all of the above problems. It takes inspiration from both webcomponents-in-react and use-custom-element, but it fixes the issues we had with each package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zywave has created [@zywave/useCustomElement-in-react](https://packages.zywave.com/feeds/private-npm/@zywave/usecustomelement-in-react/versions) to solve all of the above problems. It takes inspiration other packages in this area, but fixes a couple of headaches we've encountered along the way.
```

<docs-spacer size="small"></docs-spacer>

### Event Handlers

useCustomElement-in-react uses a ref on the web component, along with `useLayoutEffect`, to add and remove event listeners. The code for that is here:

> ```tsx

Reviewer: It looks like you go into depth on how the code works (which is cool!) but I think the reader doesn't need to know that at this time. I'd suggest omitting this, and instead calling out the features you support, something like just the list below:

* Manage adding and removing native event listeners for you
* Map common property and attributes automatically
* Offer an API for custom property-attribute mapping configuration
* Handle Object and Array property bindings (via `JSON.stringify`)

A companion blog post that is more of a technical deep dive into your experience and package would be awesome, and a great place for the source code explainers!

const customElementProps = Object.keys(props)
  .filter((key) => !(props[key] instanceof Function))
  .reduce((acc, key) => {
    const prop = props[key];

    const computedKey = customMapping[key] || key;

    if (key !== "children" && key !== "style" && (prop instanceof Object || prop instanceof Array)) {
      return { ...acc, [computedKey]: JSON.stringify(prop) };
    }

    return { ...acc, [computedKey]: prop };
  }, {});
```

Finally, we create the element and return it:
  
```tsx
// Create the element, set the ref, apply the rest of the props
return React.createElement(componentSelector, {
  ref: (ref: HTMLElement) => (webComponentRef.current = ref),
  ...customElementProps,
});
```

<docs-spacer size="small"></docs-spacer>

### ZUI component example

Using @zywave/useCustomElement-in-react, we can simply create React components that wrap the ZUI web components. Here is an example of the `zui-pager` element (including all of the prop types, and a custom event type):

```tsx
import React from "react";
import { useCustomElement } from "@zywave/usecustomelement-in-react";

export type ZuiPagerChangedEvent = {
  value: number;
};

export type ZuiPagerProps = {

>   totalPages?: number;

Reviewer: Can we use the typings managed by ZUI here?

Author: Same as above, I created an issue here: https://gitlab.com/zywave/ams/ams-policy-and-revenue/zui-react-wrapper/-/issues/2

I don't think this is necessary for the article.

  currentPage?: number;
  type?: "standard" | "lite" | "select";
  hrefFormat?: string;
  hideInput?: true | null;
  pageSize?: number;
  totalCount?: number;
  onChange?: (event: CustomEvent<ZuiPagerChangedEvent>) => void;
} & Omit<React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement>, "onChange">;

export const ZuiPager = (props: ZuiPagerProps) => {
  const selector = "zui-pager";
  const customMappings = {
    totalPages: "total-pages",
    currentPage: "current-page",
    hrefFormat: "href-format",
    hideInput: "hide-input",
    pageSize: "page-size",
    totalCount: "total-count",
  };
  return useCustomElement(selector, props, customMappings);
};
```

Now you could write a wrapper component for each ZUI component that you need. Or, you can use @zywave/zui-react-wrapper!

---

## Introducing @zywave/zui-react-wrapper

> Our team has also written [@zywave/zui-react-wrapper](https://packages.zywave.com/feeds/private-npm/@zywave/zui-react-wrapper/versions) to create all of the ZUI React components for you. This package uses @zywave/useCustomElement-in-react, but takes care of all of the prop types, custom mappings, and event types. You just need to include it in your project and use it!

Reviewer: It may be worth a note here that this package must be updated independent of ZUI to grab new ZUI features (e.g. if we add a new property to ZUI Input, this package must be updated).
